# Sleep-Deprivation-Model
# Αuther: Dallin Wise, Luke Robinson, Tyler Pace, Vance Williams
# Brigham Young University

# Abstract:
In this project, we develop and analyse ODE models of the glymphatic system, focusing on soluble and fibrillar amyloid-β, to investigate efficient strategies for obtaining sufficient sleep. Using our results, we examine whether it is possible to recover lost sleep and explore alternative sleep strategies for achieving adequate rest.

# Motivation/Background:
The exact functions and physiology of sleep remain an ongoing topic of investigation and discussion in medicine. However, recent findings have indicated that its purpose is, in part, to enable regular clearance of the metabolic waste products, or metabolites, which naturally accumulate in the interstitial space between brain cells. [[Xie](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24136970/)] One of the mechanisms that makes this clearance possible is known as the glymphatic system. This system is primarily active during sleep, specifically N3 or slow-wave sleep, when the interstitial space between brain cells expands. [[Reddy](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33212927/)] This expansion and the ensuing glymphatic activity flood the brain with cerebrospinal fluid, which, by various pathways, carries metabolites into the blood and lymphatic system for processing. [[Tarasoff, Plog](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29195051/)]

One metabolite of special interest is known as amyloid-β (Aβ), which is significant for its well-documented correlation with neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). In its soluble form, Aβ can be cleared from the interstitial fluid by the glymphatic system. However, by an aggregation process, Aβ monomers bind into toxic plaques characteristic of AD. This aggregation process is the subject of ongoing study, but is typically gradual and subject to a variety of conditions, including long-term concentration of soluble Aβ in the brain. 

An important question to consider is how lifestyle choices and other conditions impact the glymphatic system's efficacy in Aβ clearance. Although this is important to understanding AD pathology, empirical research on the matter is limited by the invasive nature of direct Aβ measurements from the cerebrospinal fluid and the lack of reliable alternative means.\cite{Huang} Herein lies the aim of our model: to quantify the effects of lifestyle choices on glymphatic activity and resulting Aβ concentration in the brain. In particular, we explore the effects of differing sleep patterns on both soluble Aβ levels in the short term and fibrillar Aβ buildup in the long term.
